all right welcome back everyone today
we're going to go into a deep dive on
Amazon's Dynamo DB specifically through
the lens of how and when to use it in a
system design interview so we're going
to go over the data model we're going to
go over indexing talk about how to
access data some Basics around the
architecture as it pertains to
scalability and availability uh we're
going to talk about some Advanced
features like dynamodb accelerator as
well as Dynam DB streams and then we'll
wrap up with most importantly when
should you use it in an interview and
maybe when should you avoid it so strap
in it's going to be a lot fun let's get
after
it all right let's start by wrapping our
head around the the data model for
Dynamo DB here there's three key
Concepts that are really important to
know as it pertains to the Dynamo DB
data model uh the first is a table so
all data is stored in collections called
tables this is exactly the same as with
SQL these are just collections of
related data but then within each table
you're going to have items items are
just individual records each with a
unique primary key and these are like
rows in a SQL table or rows in a
spreadsheet and then within each item
you're going to have a set of attributes
and those attributes are like columns in
a spreadsheet or column in a in a SQL
table but they're the actual data fields
within each item like the name or the
age and so we can take a look at this
example that we have here this is a
basic user table that you might have for
any standard application and the table
has a collection of users each
particular item or row here is a given
user and then the attributes are these
columns the information about any given
user and so one thing that's important
to note here is that not all users have
all attributes and this is okay so
Dynamo DB is schemes uh this means that
items in the same table can have
different attributes so we could even
have a a new attribute here call it I
don't know employer and only give that
to Sarah and Jimmy but not to Stefan and
Evan here and that would be okay um this
is very different like I said than SQL
where you have to conform to a table's
rigid schemas with predefined columns
and so there's pros and cons to this
right on one hand it's fast and it's
flexible for an application since we
have to change our data structures
there's no migrations um plus we only
pay for what we store we don't have
empty columns that take up space like we
would in SQL which would just have
undefined values but there's the
trade-off our application now needs to
handle missing attributes uh and we need
to analyze data across items it becomes
trickier we can't rely on the database
to enforce the data consistency like we
can in SQL and so like anything else
there's pros and cons and potentially
pros and cons that you're going to want
to weigh in your interview when you're
making your
decision now you're probably aware that
in SQL databases we have a primary key
that uniquely identifies each rows and
helps us with those fast lookups and so
that's what the user ID typically maybe
would be here and why it's colored green
now in Dynamo DB it's simple but instead
we have two two things we have a
partition key and a sort key and these
work together to give us those fast
lookups and data organization and so
let's talk about about each of these the
partition key is unique identifier that
determines the item's physical location
and so what we do is we take this
partition key we hash it using a
consistent hashing function and then
this determines which physical node
which physical piece of Hardware this
data lies on and then for sort Keys
these are optional you don't need a sort
key but it's a secondary attribute and
it enables ordering and range queries
within a partition and so for each sort
key we end up having a b tree index you
just think of a tree that's kept in
memory uh and we use this for these
range queries like when we want to get
all items between a start and an end
time or when we want to sort for example
like get all posts in a descending order
uh based on the creation time and then
the primary key is just a combination of
these two things and so it's a
combination of the partition key and
optionally the sort key
so let's look at some examples because
the reason that this matters is that in
your system design interview if you're
using Dynamo DB you're typically going
to introduce your data model and explain
to your interviewer what is your
partition key and what is optionally
your sort key and so if we're thinking
about a chat app well we want our
primary key oh excuse me this should say
partition key we want our partition key
to be the chat ID this means that all
messages for a particular chat group
chat are going to be collocated on the
same node on the same physical Hardware
so we don't have to go reach out to a
bunch of different nodes and Scatter
Gather in order to get all of the chats
um all the messages from a particular
chat ID so that makes sense and then the
typical operation is that we want to
sort these by time now what we can do
then is have the sort key as a message
ID and I know what you what you may be
thinking you may be thinking why is it a
message ID and not a timestamp well the
primary key has to be unique and so if
you had two messages that were created
at the same time and their primary key
is a concatenation of the chat ID and
the time they were created well these
two things wouldn't be unique it would
be a failed right and so instead we can
have the same properties of having the
sort key basically be Time by having the
message ID be monotonically increasing
and so a monotonically increasing ID
this is just a fancy way of saying that
numbers that always go up and so each
new ID is guaranteed to be bigger than
the last one and what this means is that
when you sort by these IDs
alphabetically you're automatically
sorting by them uh by the time that they
were created right and so for a chat
application our partition key is a chat
ID our sort key thus is the message ID
for e-commerce maybe our most common
query pattern is that we want to get all
orders for a particular user and so we'd
make our partition key user ID again to
collocate all of the orders for a
particular user on the same Shard or the
same partition and then maybe we want to
order by the order time and so we have
our Sor key as the order ID again a
monotonically increasing ID and then for
social media it's the really similar
concept maybe we our most common query
is to get all posts for a particular
user and we want to be able to sort
those by time so we have the exact same
setup now these partition keys and sort
keys are really effective in ensuring
that we can efficiently query for in
sort data but what if you needed to
efficiently query by something other
than your partition key like in this
case maybe instead of efficiently
querying by all messages in a chat app I
also in a different part of my
application need to efficiently query
for all messages sent by a given user
alternatively what if you wanted to sort
by something other than your sort key so
instead of monotonically increasing uh
message ID so sorting by time basically
what if I want to sort by the number of
attachments in messages well this is
where secondary indexes come into play
and so we have two types of secondary
indexes we have one a global secondary
index a GSI and two a local secondary
index and so let's look at each of these
a global secondary index is for that
first use case where you want to be able
to efficiently quer by something other
than your existing partition key and so
here's our main table we determined that
our partition key was chat ID because
the most common query pattern for us is
to get all messages for a given chat um
but we now introduced a new page on our
website where we show users all of the
chats that they've sent across chat IDs
and it was super inefficient because we
had to go grab these from a bunch of
different partitions a bunch of
different physical notes and so to solve
this we create a global mobal secondary
index on a different partition key in
this case on the user ID and so now both
of these things exist it's almost like a
replica of the table and for our Global
secondary index we can optionally
project any of the attributes that we
need here and so only the ones that we
need in order to be be be U
conscientious of our storage um would
get projected over here to This Global
secondary index but now regardless of
whether users are querying to see all
messages of a chat or all messages sent
by given user they can do so efficiently
because we have this Global secondary
index and then local secondary indexes
as you're probably catching on already
this is for the case where we want to
sort by something other than our
existing sort key and so we have the
same partition key in this case back to
our example we have chat ID as our
original partition key and the
monotonically increasing message ID so
we can sort by time uh as our sort ke
key but now we want to also be able to
sort by the number of attachments we
have a a portion of our chat application
which is maybe it's like slack there's a
lot of attachments being sent and we
want to be able to see the messages that
have the most attachments so that we can
find attachments I don't know a bit
contrived but you get the idea and so we
can create a local secondary index where
the sort key for that local secondary
index is the number of attachments and
so basically now we have a a b tree for
message ID so that we can efficiently do
range queries and sorts based on the
message ID or the time and we also have
one for the number of attachments so
that we can do the same
and so in your interview this is
relevant because if you find use cases
where you have a uh two different
functional requirements maybe that
require different query patterns then
you can emphasize to your interviewer
that you're going to create a global
secondary index or a local secondary
index respectively and you can mention
on what new Partition key or sort key in
order to accomplish your
goal all right Switching gears just for
a moment well you don't directly need to
know this uh for an interview I always
learned about when I can see something
practically applied so how do you
actually create a table in query with
Dynamo DB well first off it's dead
simple you go to the AWS console you
click on Dynamo DB you create create new
table and it takes you here you specify
your table name what your partition key
is and your sort key um down here
there's an additional button it's
defaulted to leave the custom settings
alternative or or the default settings
alternatively you can hit custom
settings and then specify some Global
secondary indexes local secondary
indexes you can also always build those
after the fact so it's really that
simple it's it's a couple button clicks
what about with querying so if we come
down here you can see what this looks
like in SQL and you're probably familiar
with this if I want to query all of our
users from our user table let's just
select star from users that's how we do
a full table scan there in Dynamo DB
what you end up doing is that you'll
have some SDK in whatever your native
programming language is that allows you
to query dynb and so for example if it's
JavaScript you'd have dynamod db. query
and then you pass in some parameters and
it returns your data and so let's look
at what the parameters in each of these
cases would be so for select star from
users it's just specify as the params
the table name and that's going to
return to you all the items in that
table now a little bit more complicated
what if we want to add a wear Clause so
we want to select star from users but
only where the user ID is 101 well now
our prams is still table name users but
we add an additional expression and we
specify the user ID needs to equal some
ID
and that ID is 101 so pretty
straightforward rather intuitive easy
enough let's look at one more here uh
what about in the case where we want to
sort right so we want to sort by some
order date this is that sort key comes
in handy and so now we can have that
table name of orders we can still have
some condition like we had before but
we'll have this scan index forward and
so uh if you put this as false it's
descending if you put it as true it's
ascending so it's a different language a
different query language but it's
directly there within your code it's
rather intuitive easy enough there's
actually one other thing I want to show
you and that's transactions and so I've
alluded to this a handful of times I
think I'm going to continue to do so
transactions were introduced in Dynamo
DB in 2018 a transaction is just a way
to ensure that group of operations
either all happen successfully
atomically or none of them happen at all
just like in a SQL database and so
typically it was like if you need Atomic
operations then you would have to go
with the SQL database in your system
design interview not anymore Dynam DB
supports transactions and so see how it
does it begin transaction this is in SQL
and then we have two uh things that we
want to do here this is in the case
where we want to remove $10 from
someone's balance and add $10 to someone
else's balance like in a banking
application and here's how we would do
it in Dynam DB we would do dynamod db.
transactions transact right and then we
just have a list of the two operations
that we want to have happen so in this
case reduce 100 from one person and add
100 to someone else so super cool Dynam
DB even supports transactions you can
tell your interviewer
that now let's talk just a little bit
about what's actually happening under
the hood here and so we've chatted about
how Dynamo DB scales by using consistent
hashing on items partition keys in order
to determine where to physically store
the item and so just as a reminder and I
have a diagram here for you consistent
hashing works by mapping each node in
the system each physical piece of
Hardware or you can also have virtual
nodes but let me handwave that for a
moment to an assigned position on a
circular ring and so here you have a
circular ring it goes zero to 100 at
least in our contrived example and then
what you're going to do is you're going
to take some partition key you're going
to Hash it and that hash is going to
create some number sometimes you might
need to take a modulo so that it falls
on the ring but regardless you're going
to pass it through some function so that
it's going to give you a number in our
contrived example 0 to 100 and so we're
going to go to that point on the ring in
this case 20 8 and then we're going to
walk clockwise from there until we find
the first node this is the node that
that item is stored on and so the nice
thing about this is that if you remove
nodes like for example that one then the
only things that are affected are the
direct neighbors nothing needed to be
redistributed over here for example and
so there are plenty of videos online
about consistent hashing they go into
far more detail than that but I just
wanted to do a quick reminder there and
emphasize that that's what uh Dynamo DB
is using under the hood on the partition
Keys now when it comes to to fault
tolerance excuse me and availability
dynamodb is using asynchronous
replication and so this just means that
all wrs come into a single leader node
and that leader node then asynchronously
forwards that data on to replicas that
are in different physical locations
different availability zones they're
called in Dynamo DB and so Dynam DB
actually this is this is fairly
interesting it uses something called
saloy quorum
which means that even if some network
connectivity is severed like here boom
boom it's a white pen so you can't see
that but imagine network connectivity
was severed there then we temporarily
allow rights even during those network
issues and we just fix any of those
consistencies later behind the scenes
cool so that's what's happening there
every time you write you write to a
leader you asynchronously replicate now
in the majority case in the default case
we can read from either leader or any of
the replicas but this just might mean
that you have some slight eventual
consist consistency so if somebody in
some part of the world just wrote some
data to the leader and it had only been
propagated to the replica 1 but not to
replica 2 yet and someone else was
reading data from replica 2 they might
have slightly stale data in the order of
you
know maybe milliseconds uh you know it
depends on what your network congestion
might be but that's the eventual
consistency case and that's the default
for Dynam DB but oh where was it I had a
box here somewhere but bang in 2018 DB
introduced support for strong
consistency so now while eventual
consistency is still the default you can
enable strongly consistent reads and
what this means is that if you have
strongly consistent reads enabled then
all of your reads are going to come off
of the leader and you're not going to
have any of that replication lag and so
this can hurt some of your scaling this
has some Downstream negative
consequences but more importantly what
it means in your system design interview
is that in your non-functional
requirements when you consider cap
theorem and going to decide whether you
need High availability or strong
consistency it used to be the case that
if you chose strong consistency then
your database Choice almost necessarily
has to be SQL that's not the case
anymore now you can explain in your
interview that I need strong consistency
which just means that I'm going to
enable strongly consistent reads within
Dynamo DB and just like we were showing
earlier this is super easy it's just the
configuration your AWS dashboard you're
just going to check a box pretty
straightforward all right at this point
you have the basics down you largely
have everything that you need to know in
order to introduce and use competently
Dynamo DB in a system design interview
um but I want to introduce some ADV
Advanced features here that are
supported by Dynamo DB that are really
neat and handy to pull out in your
interview the first one is Dax uh it's
short for Dynam DB accelerator and what
it is is it's a built-in cache it's an
in-memory caching layer that provides
microc response times for heavy read
loads uh with Auto automatic read right
through caching and so what you can do
in your dashboard is you can enable uh
Dynam DB accelerator Dax and this is
just a caching layer that's going to sit
in front of Dynamo DB automatically and
now you can query this cache and you can
configure uh how you want to handle your
eviction policies and things like this
but the important thing to note is that
if you introduce dynamodb in your
interview and then you decide that you
need a cash in most cases not all but in
the overwhelming majority of cases you
want to say that you're just going to to
enable Dax not that you're going to
introduce reddis or something else this
would be um suboptimal for you to do
something like that so let's look at an
example of a place where you would need
this it's the same place that you would
need a cach generally but let's say you
had a system design interview for
something like Yelp and you were
designing a basic um you know review
service for businesses you have a client
you have some business service and then
interfaces with Dynamo DB which has all
of the business information and maybe
you want to make retrieving businesses
fast by ID I would argue you don't
really need to enable Dax for this
you're already at you know single- digit
millisecond latency with Dynamo DB do
you really need microsc latency probably
not but what if there are some queries
that are a little bit more expensive
like a query to get all of the reviews
and find the average review now of
course there are other ways to do this
but bear with me for the example it
might be that you just cache the results
of that query in Dax and in doing so now
you significantly reduced your latency
CU you don't have that quote unquote
more expensive aggregation it's just as
simple as enabling Dax and so in your
interview you can say as much I have
anim ODB in order to make sure things
are more efficient I'm going to cach
this data by enabling Dax cool let's
look at the second one here and the last
one of the advanced features I want to
introduce that's useful in a system
design interview this one's Dynam DB
streams and so if you've watched any of
our other videos you've seen me use
sometimes change data capture and what
this is is it basically means that you
can track any cable modifications so
changes that happen in dat in Dynamo DB
like inserts updates deletes Etc they
can trigger some Downstream process this
Downstream process could be like to put
it into a que to have some Lambda worker
do something off of it um one concrete
example is here let's look at this
imagine that you're designing Ticket
Master and you have an event service
which has an events DB and it has all
the events that are available to users
but users need to be able to search for
events and this searching through events
is fairly complex and expensive it has
geospatial queries it has um you know
full text search Etc and so we opted to
use a search optimized database like
elastic search but now we want to make
sure that these two things remain in
sync they remain consistent at least
eventually so and so one thing that we
can do is just have every time a new
event is added or updated to the events
DB we can use uh Dynamo DB streams ddb
streams in order to make sure that that
update is reflected in elastic search
and so you would configure Dynamo DB
streams here you would have some Lambda
like this drawing is how we do it in a
system design interview typically but
it's an abstraction you'd have some
Lambda here that takes any changes and
then goes and issues some query to
elastic search or some right operation
to elastic search in order to update the
data there accordingly so if you need
CDC and you're using Dynamo DBS uh you
can just say that you'll use ddb
streams all right so let's answer the
million dollar question that you are all
here for uh when should you use Dynamo
DB in an interview well the reality is
for most system design interviews Dynamo
DB works great So my answer is like most
of the time U but in the same way
postgress works great so if you ask me
the same question about postgress I
would say it also is most of the time
these Technologies in databases have
converged so much uh that they all or or
at least a large percentage of the most
popular ones work for the majority of
cases don't ever think this but the more
interesting question might end up being
when should you stay away from Dynam DB
and I think there's three rules that you
can follow here the first if you is if
you have really complex query patterns
and so this is going to be joins across
a bunch of tables a lot of subqueries
then it's true dynamodb might be able to
pull this off uh with proper modeling
but a SQL database is still probably the
better tool for the job and then second
is that if you need transactions across
multiple tables Dynam DB can support
this but there's a limit on the number
of items that can be items again or rows
right that can be in a given transaction
I think this number is at 100 right now
don't quote me on that um but this may
or may not work for your use case so
might be something that you want to stay
away from and use SQL for instead and
then lastly is if you have complex data
modeling typically the sign here at
least in production is if you have a ton
of gsis or lsis Global secondary indexes
or local secondary indexes then you may
be abusing dyn a bit and you should
consider going with SQL instead but all
in all the main takeaway and I think we
suggest this on the website as well if
you're going to learn two main databases
for your interviews I would learn about
postgress and I would learn about Dynamo
DB and you can largely use either of
them in just about any circumstance and
you'll want to weigh just some of these
pros and cons appropriately in order to
make the uh most effective
decision all right so zooming out here
both figuratively and literally you can
see that we we've covered a lot of
ground in a fair fairly short period of
time so you should have the basics under
your belt how to use Dynam DB in a
system design interview you're feeling
more confident of course my advice from
here is to go actually play with it on
there are free accounts with AWS you can
set up a a simple Dynamo DB instance
query it have some fun get some
practical experience but they should
equip you with most of what you need in
order to answer interviewer's questions
and have a pretty comprehensive
understanding of when to use it in an
interview so thank you all for watching
there'll be more of these if you have
questions please leave them in the
comments of course if I said something
wrong let me know in the comments and as
always good luck with your interviews
talk to you soon